Generalize tree extend/truncate algorithms (#522)
mlswg/mls-protocol: draft-ietf-mls-protocol.md

      _
    __|__
   /     \
  _       Z[C]
 / \     / \
A   _   C   D

0   1   2   3
~~~~~

In this tree, we can see all of the above rules in play:

* The resolution of node Z is the list \[Z, C\]
* The resolution of leaf 1 is the empty list \[\]

> * The resolution of root node is the list \[A, CD, C\]

Author: ```suggestion
* The resolution of root node is the list \[A, Z, C\]
```

After performing these operations, the generator of the UpdatePath MUST
delete the leaf_secret.

## Adding and Removing Leaves

In addition to the path-based updates to the tree described above, it is also

> necessary to add and remove leaves of the tree in order to reflect members being
> added to or removed from the group.  Leaves are always added and removed at the

Author: ```suggestion
necessary to add and remove leaves of the tree in order to reflect changes to the
membership of the group (see {{add}} and {{remove}}).  Leaves are always added and removed at the
```

right edge of the tree: Either a new rightmost leaf is added, or the rightmost
leaf is removed.  Nodes' parent/child node relationships are then updated to
maintain the tree's left-balanced structure.  These operations are also known as
_extending_ and _truncating_ the tree.

> To add a new leaf: Add leaf as the new rightmost leaf of the tree.  Add a blank
> parent node whose right child is the new leaf.  The parent is attached to the
> tree as the right child of the appropriate node to make the updated tree
> left-balanced (or set as a new root).  The former right child of the parent's
> parent becomes the parent's left child (or the old root becomes the left child).

Reviewer: I suggest giving names to make it easier to read. Also add emphasis that there is a unique way to incorporate the new parent in the tree that keeps it left-balanced (-> " […] as the only appropriate node […]").

```suggestion
To add a new leaf: Add leaf L as the new rightmost leaf of the tree.  Add
a blank parent node P whose right child is L.  P is attached to the
tree as the right child of the only appropriate node to make the updated tree
left-balanced (or set it as a new root).  The former right child of the P's
parent becomes P's left child (or the old root becomes the P's left child if
P is the new root).
```

~~~~~
                   _ <-- new parent              _
                 __|_                          __|__
                /    \                        /     \
  X    ===>    X     |               ===>    X       _ <-- new parent
 / \          / \    |                      / \     / \
A   B        A   B   C <-- new leaf        A   B   C   D <-- new leaf
~~~~~

> To remove the rightmost leaf: Remove the rightmost leaf node and its parent
> node.  If the parent node was the root of the tree, the parent node's left child
> is now the root of the tree.  Otherwise, set the right child of the parent's parent
> (formerly the parent itself) to be the parent's left child.

Reviewer: I also suggest giving names to nodes. Also removing "(formerly the parent itself)" because I don't see what that means.
In the first example, the leaf is D, the parent is Z, the parent's parent is Y, so the sentence says that Y's right child is now Z's left child (so C). I don't get what "former parent" means here.
```suggestion
To remove the rightmost leaf: Remove the rightmost leaf node L and its parent
node P.  If P was the root of the tree, P's left child
is now the root of the tree.  Otherwise, set the right child of P's parent
to be the P's left child.
```

~~~~~
      Y                                    Y
    __|__                                __|_
   /     \                              /    \
  X       Z <-- remove parent  ===>    X     | <-- reassign child
 / \     / \                          / \    |

> A   B   C   D <-- remove leaf        A   B   C

Author: `D` isn't necessarily a blank leaf.   In principle, one can remove the rightmost leaf even if it's populated.  This section is just describing the structure modifications; the later sections deal with what's in the tree when it gets update.

parent becomes P's left child (or the old root becomes the P's left child if
P is the new root).

~~~~~
                   _ <-- new parent              _
                 __|_                          __|__
                /    \                        /     \
  X    ===>    X     |               ===>    X       _ <-- new parent
 / \          / \    |                      / \     / \
A   B        A   B   C <-- new leaf        A   B   C   D <-- new leaf
~~~~~

To remove the rightmost leaf: Remove the rightmost leaf node L and its parent
node P.  If P was the root of the tree, P's left child
is now the root of the tree.  Otherwise, set the right child of P's parent
to be the P's left child.

~~~~~
      Y                                    Y
    __|__                                __|_
   /     \                              /    \
  X       Z <-- remove parent  ===>    X     | <-- reassign child
 / \     / \                          / \    |
A   B   C   D <-- remove leaf        A   B   C

      Y <-- remove parent
    __|_
   /    \
  X     |                  ===>    X <-- reassign root
 / \    |                         / \
A   B   C <-- remove leaf        A   B
~~~~~

> 

Reviewer: Even if this only describe the structure modification, I think it is valuable to give hints to the reader that in practice only blank leaves will be removed. If here the reader thinks that we can truncate any leaf and only afterward the reader discovers that only blank leaves can be truncated, I think it can be confusing.
Also it might look like a violation of the tree invariant, since in the second tree, D knows Y's secret without being its descendant.

```suggestion

Note: in the rest of the protocol, the rightmost leaf will be removed only when it is blank.

```

Author: Fair enough.  I think I will word this slightly differently, but I can grant that it makes sense to have a note here.

} Add;
~~~~~

An Add is applied after being included in a Commit message.  The position of the
Add in the list of proposals determines the leaf node where the new member will
be added.  For the first Add in the Commit, the corresponding new member will be
placed in the leftmost empty leaf in the tree, for the second Add, the next

> empty leaf to the right, etc. If not empty leaf exists, the tree is extended to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
empty leaf to the right, etc. If no empty leaf exists, the tree is extended to
```

* Identify a leaf in the `tree` array (any even-numbered node) whose
  `key_package` field is identical to the KeyPackage.  If no such field
  exists, return an error.  Let `my_leaf` represent this leaf in the tree.

* Construct a new group state using the information in the GroupInfo object.
    * The GroupContext contains the `group_id`, `epoch`, `tree_hash`,
      `confirmed_transcript_hash`, and `group_context_extensions` fields from
      the GroupInfo object.

    * The new member's position in the tree is at the leaf `my_leaf`, as defined
      above.

    * Update the leaf `my_leaf` with the private key corresponding to the
      public key in the node.

    * If the `path_secret` value is set in the GroupSecrets object: Identify the
      lowest common ancestor of the leaf node `my_leaf` and of the node of

>       the member with KeyPackageID `GroupInfo.signer`. Set the private key for

Reviewer 2: KeyPackageRef

Author: ```suggestion
      the member with KeyPackageRef `GroupInfo.signer`. Set the private key for
```

its right subtree.  (This is the same ordering as specified for the array-based
trees outlined in {{array-based-trees}}.)

The leaves of the tree are stored in even-numbered entries in
the array (the leaf with index L in array position 2*L). The root node of the
tree is at position 2^k - 1 of the array, where k is the largest number such
that 2^k is smaller than the length of the array. Intermediate parent nodes can
be identified by performing the same calculation to the subarrays to the left
and right of the root, following something like the following algorithm:

~~~~~
# Assuming a class Node that has left and right members
def subtree_root(nodes):
    # If there is only one node in the array return it
    if len(nodes) == 1:
        return Node(nodes[0])

    # Otherwise, the length of the array MUST be odd
    if len(nodes) % 2 == 0:
        raise Exception("Malformed node array {}", len(nodes))

    # Identify the root of the subtree
    k = 0
    while (2**(k+1)) < len(nodes):
       k += 1
    R = 2**k - 1
    root = Node(nodes[R])
    root.left = subtree_root(nodes[:R])
    root.right = subtree_root(nodes[(R+1):])
    return root
~~~~~

> 

Author: ```suggestion

(Note that this is the same ordering of nodes as in the array-based tree representation
described in {{array-based-trees}}.  The algorithms in that section may be used to 
simplify decoding this extension into other representations.)

```

> 

Author: ```suggestion

(Note that this is the same ordering of nodes as in the array-based tree representation
described in {{array-based-trees}}.  The algorithms in that section may be used to 
simplify decoding this extension into other representations.)

```

    def span(self):
        if self.leaf():
            return 1
        return self.left.span() + self.right.span()

    def full(self):
        span = self.span()
        while span % 2 == 0:
            span >>= 1
        return span == 1

    def rightmost_leaf(self):
        X = self
        while X.right != None:
            X = X.right
        return X

class Tree:
    def __init__(self):
        self.root = None  # Root node of the tree, initially empty

    def extend(self, N):
        if self.root == None:
            self.root = N
            return

        # Identify the proper point to insert the new parent node
        X = self.root.rightmost_leaf()
        while X.full() and X != self.root:
            X = X.parent

        # If X is not full, insert the new parent under X
        P = Node("_", right=N)
        N.parent = P
        if not X.full():
            P.parent = X
            P.left = X.right
            X.right.parent = P
            X.right = P
            return

        # If X is full, then X is the root, so P replaces the root
        P.left = self.root
        self.root.parent = P
        self.root = P
        return

    def truncate(self):

>         X = self.root.rightmost_leaf()

Author: As above, not true that we can only truncate blank leaves.
